SOURCE ID : src-141
TITLE     : Paris Charter
URL       : https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Paris_Charter
PUBLISHER : Wikipedia
RETRIEVED : 2026-03-26T14:06:11.050319+00:00
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

Toggle the table of contents
Paris Charter
 15 languages
العربية
Azərbaycanca
Беларуская
Български
Deutsch
Esperanto
Español
Français
Italiano
Lietuvių
Polski
Română
Русский
Shqip
Українська
Edit links
Article
Talk
 English
Read
Edit
View history
 Tools
Tools
move to sidebar hide
Actions
Read
Edit
View history
General
What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Permanent link
Page information
Cite this page
Get shortened URL
Print/export
Download as PDF
Printable version
In other projects
Wikidata item
Appearance
move to sidebar hide
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
For the set of principles on human experimentation or the Charter against cancer, see Declaration of Helsinki and Charter of Paris against cancer.
	
This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.
Find sources: "Paris Charter" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (January 2023) (Learn how and when to remove this message)
Charter of Paris for a New Europe

Host country	France
Date	19–21 November 1990
Cities	Paris
Venues	Palais de l'Élysée
Participants	 Helmut Kohl
 George H. W. Bush
 Franz Vranitzky
 Wilfried Martens
 Georgi Atanasov
 Brian Mulroney
 George Vassiliou
 Poul Schlüter
 Felipe González
 Mauno Koivisto
 François Mitterrand
 Margaret Thatcher
 Konstantinos Mitsotakis
 József Antall
 Charles Haughey
 Davíð Oddsson
 Giulio Andreotti
 Hans Brunhart
 Jacques Santer
 Eddie Fenech Adami
 Jacques Dupont
 Gro Harlem Brundtland
 Ruud Lubbers
 Wojciech Jaruzelski
 Cavaco Silva
 Ion Iliescu
 Cesare Gasperoni
 Angelo Sodano
 Ingvar Carlsson
 Arnold Koller
 Václav Havel
 Turgut Özal
 Mikhail Gorbachev
 Borisav Jović
Follows	Helsinki Accords

The Charter of Paris for a New Europe (also known as the Paris Charter) was adopted by a summit meeting of most European governments in addition to those of Canada, the United States and the Soviet Union, in Paris from 19–21 November 1990. The charter was established on the foundation of the Helsinki Accords and was further amended in the 1999 Charter for European Security. Together, these documents form the agreed basis for the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe. However, not all OSCE member countries have signed the treaty.

Purpose
[edit]

The Charter was one of many attempts to seize the opportunity of the fall of Communism by actively inviting the former Eastern Bloc countries into the ideological framework of the West. It has been compared to the Conference of Versailles of 1919 or the Congress of Vienna of 1815 in its grandiose ambition to reshape Europe.[citation needed] In effect, the Paris Summit was the peace conference of the Cold War: Perestroika had ultimately put an end to the ideological and political division of the Iron Curtain. Pluralist democracy and market economy were together with international law and multilateralism seen as the victors.

The Charter established an Office for Free Elections (later renamed Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights) in Warsaw, a Conflict Prevention Centre in Vienna, and a secretariat. Later, in 1992, a Secretary General was also appointed. It was agreed that the Foreign Ministers are to convene regularly for political consultations.

British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher attended the summit while undergoing a challenge to her leadership of the country's ruling Conservative Party, and it was while in Paris that she learned she had not obtained sufficient votes in the first round of the party's leadership election to be declared the winner outright, necessitating a further round of voting. Thatcher later claimed that the fact she was in Paris and unable to begin immediately rallying support was one of the factors that led to her leaving the leadership election and resigning as party leader and Prime Minister after 11 years of power.[1]

See also
[edit]
German reunification
References
[edit]
^ "Wielding the Knife". Thatcher: The Downing Street Years. 10 November 1993. BBC Television. BBC One.
Further reading
[edit]
Road to the Charter of Paris: Historical Narratives and Lessons for the OSCE Today, https://osce-network.net/publications/detail/the-road-to-the-charter-of-paris-historical-narratives-and-lessons-for-the-osce-today
External links
[edit]
Text of the Charter
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Paris_Charter&oldid=1335591869"
Categories:
Political charters
Treaties concluded in 1990
1990 in Europe
Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe
1990 in international relations
Treaties of the Soviet Union
1990 in Paris
November 1990 in France
Treaties signed in Paris
Hidden categories:
Articles with short description
Short description is different from Wikidata
Articles needing additional references from January 2023
All articles needing additional references
All articles with unsourced statements
Articles with unsourced statements from February 2008