SOURCE ID : src-187
TITLE     : U.S.-Style Poll Finds Soviets Like Gorbachev (February 1990)
URL       : https://www.chicagotribune.com/1990/02/06/us-style-poll-finds-soviets-like-gorbachev/
PUBLISHER : Chicago Tribune
RETRIEVED : 2026-03-26T14:06:51.778449+00:00
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

NEWS
U.S.-STYLE POLL FINDS SOVIETS LIKE GORBACHEV
By Chicago Tribune
PUBLISHED: February 6, 1990 at 1:00 AM CST | UPDATED: August 10, 2021 at 5:13 PM CDT
Getting your Trinity Audio player ready...

Herewith, the inside, scientific details on Mikhail Gorbachev`s popularity in his own country:

About 47 percent of the people of the Soviet Union give him very favorable ratings. The only other Soviet politician who even makes it into the double digits is brash Boris Yeltsin, viewed favorably by 14 percent.

Everybody else, and there are lots of them in this category, falls so far back into the pack that the numbers are gobbled up by slight margins of error that occur in all polling.

When the spokesmen for perestroika, or reform, offer the assessment that there is no one else to take Gorbachev`s place, these are the numbers they have in mind. They come from a national poll conducted last fall.

The source of this wisdom is the National Public Opinion Research Center, a two-year-old polling organization that represents a quantum jump in Soviet politics.

Ironically, because the USSR has always emphasized the collective and shunned individual initiatives, many people genuinely have no political opinions that can be easily tapped.

Soviet politics has not yet reached the point at which public opinion plays the kind of central role common in Western politics, but it is heading rapidly in that direction.

Polls are popping up all over the place, covering everything from the availability of public facilities to whether Muscovites like Italian shoes.

(The answer is a resounding yes.)

Serious polling in the Soviet Union is becoming a sophisticated discipline that has produced some surprising early results, particularly on the public attitudes toward the government and the Communist Party.

”It`s really like hunting in the wilderness,” said polling project director Nikolai Popov. ”You can never really tell what kind of animal will jump out of the bush. Maybe a tiger, sometimes.”

Because the USSR has a population of nearly 300 million spread across 100 nationalities and a huge land mass, Soviet polling is not easy. But Popov is a man on a mission, with no hesitation when he describes and analyzes polling results.

The Gorbachev numbers are little lessons in practical politics, not only for the Soviet leader but for the people he must influence. Although the assumption has been that his popularity inside the country is declining even as his stature grows on the world stage, Popov offers a few distinctions, based on his polling materials.

One of them is that the Soviet public displays clear political sophistication when it responds to questions about Gorbachev and the Communist Party. For example, he wins the highest marks as a Soviet leader at the same time that the party he heads watches its support plummet.

Whether all of this is bad news or good news for Gorbachev and perestroika is difficult to assess, and could actually be irrelevant when the results are set against another measure.

”Our people have to get used to the idea that governments are theirs to criticize. So the low support for government, for the executive branch, is quite a regular thing, at least in Western cultures,” Popov said.

”But in our case, loyalty to the government is more taken as a tradition, a habit. When people are saying certain critical things about government here, it reflects their anxiety and dissatisfaction . . . and a certain political energy for change.”

The quest to develop accurate statistics and measures of public support and sentiment is one of the most aggressive domestic efforts of the Gorbachev era, and the Opinion Research Center is playing the leading role.

As project director, Popov is the center`s master of the numbers produced by the 80 national and regional polls conducted by the center.

The initial challenge was to set up 26 polling centers across the country, train a staff and start to develop a base line of information that could be used over the long term to analyze the polling data. Popov has 190 employees.

Soviet polling mirrors polling in the U.S. but has a few differences that make collecting and interpreting the results much more difficult.

Is the public afraid of government pollsters, given the long history of repression and misuse of information?

No, says Popov. The agency insists on personal interviews, not telephone polling, which makes the process much less ominous.

Beyond that, he says, his agency is sponsored by relatively benign sections of the Soviet governnment, the Labor Ministry and the trade union movement. It`s not like being visited by the militia.

Especially in rural areas, the arrival of the questioner may be cause for a party. ”Sometimes it`s wine and cheer first, and then the questions,” he said.

But the pollsters sometimes hit solid rock when they get into questions that seek opinions on political issues. The problem is not whether people answer (90 percent respond to the questions), Popov said, but how they answer. ”The . . . people are not accustomed to thinking individually,” he said. ” `What is your opinion?` It`s a regular question.

” `I don`t have an opinion on that. We have the party, the newspapers. We have people who create our opinions. Our opinions are just the same as everyone else`s opinions.`

”We have lived with this political culture for so many decades that it has really become a part of the people`s mentality,” Popov said.

Facebook
Bluesky
X
Print
Email
Click to share a free article with a friend
GIFT THIS ARTICLE
What is article sharing?

Subscribers are entitled to 10 gift sharing articles each month. These can be shared with friends and family who are not subscribers.

Subscribe now! or Sign in to your account.

Subscribe Log in
Cancel 
Most Popular
MOST POPULAR
Asking Eric: I love my brother, but I don’t agree with his politics
Asking Eric: I love my brother, but I don’t agree with his politics
Chicago’s human rights commissioner resigns as Mayor Brandon Johnson defends public safety leaders’ firings
Chicago's human rights commissioner resigns as Mayor Brandon Johnson defends public safety leaders’ firings
Valparaiso revokes liquor license for failed restaurant site
Valparaiso revokes liquor license for failed restaurant site
Expect severe thunderstorms in Chicago on Thursday
Expect severe thunderstorms in Chicago on Thursday
Asking Eric: Friend wouldn’t get up early to help me
Asking Eric: Friend wouldn't get up early to help me
Chicago Bears Q&A: Can they build a sufficient pass rush? How about a trade up for Jeremiyah Love?
Chicago Bears Q&A: Can they build a sufficient pass rush? How about a trade up for Jeremiyah Love?
Chicago Mayor Brandon Johnson vetoes tipped wage freeze, setting up City Council showdown
Chicago Mayor Brandon Johnson vetoes tipped wage freeze, setting up City Council showdown
Gov. JB Pritzker acknowledges ‘real failures’ in immigration system after Loyola student’s killing
Gov. JB Pritzker acknowledges 'real failures' in immigration system after Loyola student's killing
Mars Snacking to invest $100 million, add 600 jobs through Chicago HQ expansion
Mars Snacking to invest $100 million, add 600 jobs through Chicago HQ expansion
Safety of e-scooters questioned as family grieves teen killed in hit-and-run
Safety of e-scooters questioned as family grieves teen killed in hit-and-run