SOURCE ID : src-188
TITLE     : Gorbachev Gets High Marks in Soviet Poll (May 1990 - 68% Approval)
URL       : https://www.tampabay.com/archive/1990/06/08/gorbachev-gets-high-marks-in-soviet-poll/
PUBLISHER : Tampa Bay Times / Los Angeles Times poll
RETRIEVED : 2026-03-26T14:06:52.234131+00:00
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

How strong is Soviet President Mikhail S. Gorbachev? How stable is the Soviet system? These questions haunted the U.S.-Soviet summit in Washington. Now, for the first time, some answers are available. Gorbachev is strong and popular. Two-thirds of the Soviet people like him and approve of the job he is doing as president. The Soviet system, however, is in crisis. Most Soviet citizens are pessimistic about the economy, impatient with the pace of reforms and desperate for change. Very few of them see any chance of a return to Stalinist repression. On the other hand, almost half the Soviet people believe the odds are good that there will be a public revolt against the Soviet regime.

These findings come from the most comprehensive poll ever taken of Soviet political attitudes. The Soviet Academy of Sciences conducted face-to-face interviews with 1,485 citizens from May 4-24 on behalf of the Los Angeles Times. Those interviewed were selected randomly from a complete list of internal passport holders in the European part of the Soviet Union. (All Soviet citizens over the age of 16 are required to carry internal passports as identification papers.)

The Los Angeles newspaper asked comparable questions of 2,144 Americans from May 10-14. Gorbachev's approval rating in the Soviet Union _ 68 percent _ is very close to President Bush's 70 percent in the United States. Moreover, 55 percent of the Soviet citizens say they would vote for Gorbachev if there was an election for president right now in the Soviet Union. By comparison, 48 percent of all Americans say they would vote for Bush.

According to the poll, most Soviet citizens are reserving judgment on Gorbachev's reforms. Only 35-39 percent say they are satisfied with glasnost (openness) and perestroika (restructuring). As might be expected, substantial majorities of the Soviet people are dissatisfied with the quality of consumer goods and services.

As might not be expected in a socialist society, substantial majorities say they are dissatisfied with the quality of health care and protection from crime. Only 35 percent say they are satisfied with their life as a whole. The figure for Americans is 92 percent. Half of the Soviet people report that their financial situation has worsened in the past year. Almost three-fourths describe the Soviet economy as bad, and half say it is in a deep crisis.

If the Soviet people aren't yet taking their frustrations out on Gorbachev, whom are they taking it out on? The answer is: on the Soviet system. Only 36 percent express a positive view of "Communists" (27 percent have a negative opinion, while the rest are neutral). According to the Los Angeles Times poll, the Communists would win 29 percent of the vote if a multiparty election was held today. The Soviet people want change. Gorbachev is popular because he offers change. The Soviet system is not popular because it is resistant to change.

What if reforms fail? In the poll, 49 percent of the Soviet people say the chances of a public revolt against the Soviet regime are "very high" or "fairly high." The one thing Soviet citizens feel is unlikely is a return to repression. Fewer than 1 in 10 believe that if Gorbachev's reforms fail, the country will revert to Stalinism.

In the end, only 30 percent of the Soviet people are confident that Gorbachev and his programs will survive. Most of the rest aren't sure what will happen.

If Gorbachev goes, what will happen to the reform program? Here's where American and Soviet citizens part company. By 5-3, most Americans believe that if Gorbachev loses power, democratic reforms in the Soviet Union will not survive. The Soviet people are more confident _ or, perhaps, more determined. By 2-1, they say that the reforms will survive, even if Gorbachev does not.

National Journal