SOURCE ID : src-190
TITLE     : Sweeping Sovereignty Declared by Ukraine - Los Angeles Times (1990)
URL       : https://www.latimes.com/archives/la-xpm-1990-07-17-mn-83-story.html
PUBLISHER : Los Angeles Times
RETRIEVED : 2026-03-26T14:06:55.056154+00:00
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

By MICHAEL PARKS
July 17, 1990 12 AM PT
TIMES STAFF WRITER

MOSCOW — The Ukrainian Parliament boldly challenged the authority of the Soviet Union’s central government Monday with a sweeping declaration of sovereignty that proclaimed the legal precedence on Ukrainian territory of its laws over all national legislation.

The declaration goes further than most similar declarations: It spells out a vision of permanent neutrality for the Ukraine and demands full control over its industry, agriculture and natural resources.

The Ukrainian Supreme Soviet also called in the declaration for the establishment of the republic’s own armed forces and the end to the deployment of conscripted Ukrainian youths in military units outside the republic.

ADVERTISEMENT

While the declaration, adopted on a 335-4 vote, stops well short of proclaiming Ukrainian independence, it adds considerable momentum to the drive for a new constitutional basis for the Soviet Union as a federal state.

As the country’s largest and wealthiest republic after Russia, the Ukraine has a political and economic weight that far exceeds that of other republics. Its declaration of sovereignty, coming after those of Russia, Moldavia, Uzbekistan and the Baltic republics of Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania, seems certain to speed the development of a new “union treaty.”

The Ukraine, which borders Poland, has a population of 52 million. Its industry includes the important Donetsk coal fields, steel mills and chemical plants, and its agricultural land is some of the country’s richest.

The declaration was adopted under strong pressure from the Ukrainian nationalist movement Rukh, which emerged in elections this year as a force to challenge the Communist Party. Communist deputies, attempting to match their Rukh counterparts in Ukrainian patriotism, finally yielded to the declaration after a fierce debate in recent weeks.

The Ukrainian lawmakers, meeting in the republic’s capital of Kiev, proclaimed the “supremacy, independence, absolute authority and indivisibility” of the republic’s laws and its government, according to the official Soviet news agency Tass.

But most of the deputies who spoke during the Supreme Soviet’s debate did not support Ukrainian secession, Tass said. Sovereignty “should not break the existing social, economic, cultural and other ties with the other republics but develop them,” Tass said. The declaration also says that Ukrainian citizens would be allowed to retain Soviet citizenship.

The declaration is essentially a statement of intent, and even its sponsors said that it would bring only limited changes immediately.

However, the declaration could lead to a “state’s rights” confrontation with the central government that would be nearly as serious as the threat posed by Lithuania’s unilateral declaration of independence in March.

The prohibition on the use of Ukrainian conscripts outside the republic will, if enforced, propel the republic into immediate conflict with the Soviet Defense Ministry, which would be required to obtain Ukrainian permission for such deployments.

The provision for the establishment of the Ukraine’s own armed forces and security services went beyond the steps taken by other republics, including Lithuania, which began to recruit a civilian guard unit.

The declaration also says that the Ukraine will establish “permanent neutrality,” that it will remain outside all military alliances and that it will not allow nuclear arms on its territory.

The assertion of the republic’s authority over the factories, mines and farms on its territory will cut across all of Moscow’s economic chains of command. The declaration calls for establishment of an independent banking system, a Ukrainian currency and a state budget independent of central government financing.

The lawmakers also demanded a share of the central government’s gold, diamond and foreign exchange holdings. They plan an economic system with prices, taxes and other finances independent of Moscow.

The declaration also proclaims the Ukraine’s “independence and equal rights in external affairs,” an area that Moscow, even in its tolerance of the country’s diverse and growing nationalisms, has reserved to itself.

Pressure is building throughout the Soviet Union for negotiations on a new “treaty of union” binding the 15 Soviet republics together on a different basis than a now-discredited 1922 agreement that brought the country into being as a federal state.

President Mikhail S. Gorbachev described such a treaty, giving the republics greater autonomy, as an urgent measure needed to hold the country together.

More to Read
Crimea without Russia? A top Ukrainian official has a plan
April 2, 2023
Russia launches ‘exceptional’ missile attack on Kyiv from land, sea and air
May 16, 2023
Ukraine tries to end battlefield stalemate in what may be start of counteroffensive
June 5, 2023