SOURCE ID : src-112
TITLE     : Sam Nujoma - Britannica
URL       : https://www.britannica.com/biography/Sam-Nujoma
PUBLISHER : Encyclopaedia Britannica
RETRIEVED : 2026-03-26T14:05:42.185078+00:00
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

Sam Nujoma
Introduction References & Edit History Quick Facts & Related Topics
Images
 
Quizzes
African Leaders: Part Two
Contents Ask Anything
Politics, Law & Government World Leaders Presidents & Heads of States
CITE
Share
Feedback
External Websites
 
Sam Nujoma Former Namibian president Sam Nujoma, 2017. (more)
Sam Nujoma
president of Namibia
Homework Help
Also known as: Samuel Shafiihuma Nujoma
Written and fact-checked by
Britannica Editors
Encyclopaedia Britannica's editors oversee subject areas in which they have extensive knowledge, whether from years of experience gained by working on that content or via study for an advanced degree....
Britannica Editors
Last updated
Mar. 2, 2026 •History
 Britannica AI
Ask Anything
Table of Contents
Table of Contents Ask Anything

Sam Nujoma (born May 12, 1929, Owambo, South West Africa [now Namibia]—died February 8, 2025, Windhoek, Namibia) was the leader of the South West Africa People’s Organization (SWAPO) liberation movement and, later, a political party, who served as the first president of independent Namibia (1990–2005).

Nujoma was born to a peasant family in the remote Ongandjera region of Owambo (Ovamboland) and spent his early years tending the family’s few cattle and goats. His primary education began at night school, and he left school at age 16 to become a railway dining-car steward. After a fellow worker was sent home without compensation following a serious injury, Nujoma tried to form a trade union for railway men but was discharged. He subsequently worked as a clerk and a store assistant.

In the late 1950s he helped found the Ovamboland People’s Organization, the forerunner of SWAPO. He went into exile in 1960 and was named president of SWAPO after it was founded on April 19 of that year. After several years of fruitlessly petitioning the United Nations to compel South Africa to release control of South West Africa, SWAPO embarked on an armed struggle in 1966. Although its guerrilla force, the People’s Liberation Army of Namibia (PLAN), failed to liberate any territory, it succeeded in focusing international attention on Namibia. In 1973 the UN General Assembly recognized SWAPO as the sole legitimate representative of the Namibian people, and in 1978 the Security Council adopted Resolution 435, which set out terms for eventual Namibian independence and which was finally accepted by South Africa in 1988. In September 1989, after nearly 30 years in exile, Nujoma returned to Namibia to lead SWAPO to victory in the UN-supervised November elections. On the day of Namibia’s independence, March 21, 1990, Nujoma was sworn in as president.

Quick Facts
Byname of:
Samuel Shafiihuma Nujoma
(Show more)
Born:
May 12, 1929, Owambo, South West Africa [now Namibia]
(Show more)
Died:
February 8, 2025, Windhoek, Namibia (aged 95)
(Show more)
Title / Office:
president (1990-2005), Namibia
(Show more)
Political Affiliation:
SWAPO Party of Namibia
(Show more)
See all related content
Britannica Quiz
African Leaders: Part Two

Although often accused of being a Marxist, Nujoma professed himself drawn more to the pragmatism of Scandinavian democratic socialism. In 1994 he was reelected president, and in 1998 the SWAPO-controlled parliament agreed to amend the constitution, allowing Nujoma to run for a third term. The move drew international and domestic criticism, but Nujoma easily won reelection in 1999. He later announced that he would not run for a fourth term, and in 2005 he stepped down from office, allowing for a peaceful transfer of power to his democratically elected successor, SWAPO stalwart Hifikepunye Pohamba. Later that year, the Namibian Parliament formally honored Nujoma with the title “Founding Father of the Namibian Nation.” He stepped down from his position as president of SWAPO in 2007.

The Editors of Encyclopaedia BritannicaThis article was most recently revised and updated by Amy McKenna.