SOURCE ID : src-057
TITLE     : Death Toll During Recent Hajj Pilgrimage Worst on Record
URL       : https://www.pbs.org/newshour/world/death-toll-during-recent-hajj-pilgrimage-worst-on-record
PUBLISHER : PBS NewsHour
RETRIEVED : 2026-03-26T14:04:54.614251+00:00
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

By —

Joshua Barajas Joshua Barajas

Leave your feedback

Share 
Copy URL
https://www.pbs.org/newshour/world/death-toll-during-recent-hajj-pilgrimage-worst-on-record
Email
Facebook
Twitter
LinkedIn
Pinterest
Tumblr
Share on Facebook  Share on Twitter 
Death toll during recent hajj pilgrimage worst on record
World Oct 9, 2015 1:53 PM EDT

A new tally raised the death toll of the stampede last month near Mecca, Saudi Arabia to at least 1,470 people, which would make it the deadliest disaster in the history of the annual hajj pilgrimage.

The updated estimate, by the Associated Press's count, is at least 700 higher than Saudi officials' tally of 769 killed during the Sept. 24 stampede. The investigation into last month's incident, which occurred in Mina, a few miles from Mecca, remains ongoing.

Although Saudi officials have said their estimate is accurate, they haven't revised their death toll count since Sept. 26, the AP reported. The AP's revised figure comes from compiling numbers that appeared in statements or officials' comments from countries whose citizens participated in the event.

Previously, the worst hajj tragedy occurred in 1990 when 1,426 people died during a stampede in an overcrowded pedestrian tunnel.

Saudi officials have said last month's stampede started when two waves of pilgrims collided on a narrow road, as millions of Muslims made their way to the holy city.

Survivors told the AP's Aya Batrawy that when the crowds intersected, people began pushing past one another.

"[T]hat's when people started tripping, falling over each other, falling over wheelchairs. People were suffocating, bodies were piling up, and the streets just turned into complete chaos and mayhem," Batrawy told the NewsHour on the day of the disaster.

Batrawy added that there were still bodies lying on the ground when she arrived at the scene 10 hours later.

Hundreds of pilgrims remain missing, the AP reported.

A free press is a cornerstone of a healthy democracy.

Support trusted journalism and civil dialogue.

Donate now 

Left: Muslim pilgrims perform prayers in Arafat during the annual hajj pilgrimage, outside the holy city of Mecca Sept. 23. A new death toll, provided by the Associated Press, makes last month's disaster during the hajj pilgrimage the deadliest in the history of the event. Photo by Ahmad Masood/Reuters

Go Deeper
associated press
crowd surges
hajj pilgrimage
hajj stampede
mecca
saudi arabia
By —

Joshua Barajas Joshua Barajas

Joshua Barajas is a senior editor for the PBS NewsHour's Communities Initiative. He's also the senior editor and manager of newsletters.

 @Josh_Barrage

Support Provided By: Learn more

Educate your inbox

Subscribe to Here’s the Deal, our politics newsletter for analysis you won’t find anywhere else.

 Enter your email address Subscribe

Thank you. Please check your inbox to confirm.

Full Episode
Wednesday, Mar 25
Trending Now

Read Mar 25 At Pentagon Christian service, Hegseth prays for violence 'against those who deserve no mercy'

Read Mar 25 Trump showed off a classified map during a 2022 plane trip, Raskin alleges in letter

Read Mar 24 Why do ICE agents get paid during the partial government shutdown, but not TSA?

Read Mar 24 Jury finds Meta's platforms are harmful to children in 1st wave of social media addiction lawsuits

Read Mar 25 Instagram and YouTube found liable in landmark social media addiction trial in California